The Project Gutenberg eBook, Kahvikulta, by Aaro A. (Aaro August) Nuutinen


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Kahvikulta
       1-näytöksinen savolaispila


Author: Aaro A. (Aaro August) Nuutinen



Release Date: October 16, 2020  [eBook #63471]

Language: Finnish

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KAHVIKULTA***


E-text prepared by Tapio Riikonen



KAHVIKULTA

1-näytöksinen savolaispila

Kirj.

AARO A. AROLA [Aaro A. Nuutinen]





Hämeenlinnassa,
Arvi A. Karisto,
1913.




HENKILÖT:

_Tuomari_.
_Kirjuri_.
_Mikko Mäkäräinen_, loismies, syytetty.
_Pekka Pakarinen_, mökkiläinen, syyttäjä.
_Riikka Pakarinen_, edellisen vaimo.
_Heta Heikkinen_, palvelustyttö, todistaja.
_Kalle Holopainen_, renkipoika, todistaja.
_Konstaapeli_.
_5 lautamiestä_.

Aika ja paikka:

Savossa; maalaistuvassa; nykyaikana.



Väliverhon avautuessa istuvat tuomari ja sihteeri pöydän takana,
edellinen selaillen papereita ja jälkimäinen kirjoittaen. Sivupenkillä
istuvat lautamiehet. Konstaapeli seisoo oven luona.

_Tuomari_ (Silmälasiensa yli katsellen papereitaan.) Öhöm, jaa-ah, nyt
tulisi sitten esille juttu numero 5. Varkausjuttu mökkiläisen Pekka
Pakarisen ja loismies Mikko Mäkäräisen välillä, molemmat kotoisin tämän
pitäjän Korpikylästä. Konstaapeli, kutsukaa asianomaiset sisälle!

_Konstaapeli_. Jahah! (Huutaa ovelta eteiseen.) Pekka Pakarinen ja
Mikko Mäkäräinen sanomaan asiastanne!

    (Pakarinen ja Mäkäräinen tulevat.)

_Tuomari_. No, miten on asia, minkä nojalla mökkiläinen Pekka Pakarinen
syyttää loismies Mikko Mäkäräistä oman käden oikeudesta; mitä hän
varasti?

_Pakarinen_. Nähkees, korkia oikeus, se on nyt sillä lailla, että mulla
olj' tuolla Lapunmäin pellossa kasvamassa männä kesänä potaattia ja
vaikka se tulj' myöhänlaiseen pannuks', niin pöyhty siitä yhtäkaikki
viis' hehtoo hyviä sokerpotattia, joita vallesmannii meillä käyvessään
syksyllä syyvessään kehui; mutt' kun myö Riikan kansa ei talavella
tarvita enempee kuin nelisen hehtoo, niin, hehon verran yletty
myötäväks' kaapunnin akoille. Ja niinpä minä sitten tässä
syksytalavella yhtenä lauvantainaamuna, kun sattui muutai asijoo
kaapuntiin, panin ruunan aisoin, -- sen entiseltä Toloppamäin Juopilta
lähteneen piirtopiän ruunan, -- sen jonka se olj' Joinsuun markkinailla
vaihtanna mustilaisilta sillä Hujas-Hermannilta lähteneellä
pattipolovi-tammalla, joka...

_Tuomari_ (Keskeyttäen.) Mitä hullutuksia te latelette? Pitää pysyä
asiassa, eihän tämä kuulu siihen ollenkaan.

_Pakarinen_. Kuuluu se.

_Tuomari_. Sanokaa lyhyesti ja selvästi, millä todisteilla syytätte
Mikko Mäkäräistä varkaudesta.

_Pakarinen_. Nähkees, korkia oikeus, se on sillä lailla, jotta kun minä
sitten ajoin kaapuntiin suoroo piätä torille potatin myöntiin, niin
ihan silläkertoo ne meni kaupaks' melekein tapellen. Ei se ihme
ollukkaan, kun ne olj' niin murakoita ja kun ei ollu kellään muilla
koko torilla myötävänä potattia; miten lie niin sattunnai, -- ai, tais'
yhellä miehellä olla vähä, mutt' niissäi tais' olla sejassa märänneitä
ja...

_Tuomari_. Lyhyesti!

_Pakarinen_. Lyhyesti, lyhyesti korkia oikeus! Se on niät sillä
tavalla, että sitten kun minä ne potatit sain myödyks', niin minä ajoin
korttieriin, sinne Samul Heiskasen talloon, -- ehken kait työ sen
tiennettäkii, -- tein hevoselle appeen ja söin itekkii reitleipee ja
makkaroo...

_Tuomari_ (Karjasee, lyöden nyrkkiään pöytään niin että sihteeri
säikähtää.) Mitä se tähän asiaan kuuluu! Ellette te pysy asiassa niin
minä sakotan teitä oikeuden pilkkaamisesta. Ei tässä ole aikaa
kuunnella typeriä juttuja kaiken maailman asioista.

_Pakarinen_. Se on niät sillä lailla, korkia oikeus, että sitten kun
minä sain syöneeks', niin keitätin emännällä vehnäskahvit; -- se kuuluu
se emäntä olevan sen Hepojoinpoloven Mikko Låks'-vainoon sisaren poijan
tyttö, -- niin, ja sitten kahvin juotua panin tuasj' kopperin aisoin ja
läksin ajamaan kottiin päin, ja justiisa kun olin piäsemässä Honkamäin
piälle, niin tämä Mäkäräinen tulloo vastaan säkki selässä ja säkistä
kuulu lampaanvuonan miäkiminen.

_Mikko Mäkäräinen_. Ouppas tok' valehtelemata, enhän minä...

_Tuomari_. Vaiti, Pakarisella on puheenvuoro.

_Pakarinen_ (Mäkäräiselle.) Kah, enkä valehtele! Vaikka minä en ollu
oikein sinua tuntee, kun olj' niin hiivatin pimmee. Vasta sivute
piästyvän' astu piähän', jotta sehän tais' ollakkii Petäjäharjun
Lois-Mikko: mistähän se lie vuonnoo säkissä hilanna? Enkä ennen kun
vasta huommesuamuna hoksasin, jotta missees se meijän vuonnalammas on,
kun ei näykkään karsinassa. Kysyin Riikalta, että "missees se meijän
vuonna on, kun ei ou karsinassa?", niin se sanoi, että "en tiijä, jos
lie karanna mehtään, vai lienevät varastaneet." Vuan minä en oikein
ottanna sitä uskooksen', että lammas on niin kova hyppeejä, jotta
piäsöö karkoomaan niin korkeesta aituuksesta, ja olj' se tok' siks'
lihavakkii, etteihän tuon ois' luullut sopineen aijanraustakaan
mänemään; vai lie juutas pakkautunna oksanreijästä...

    (Naurahtaa.)

_Mäkäräinen_. Elekee uskoo sitä, korkee oikeus, se peijuon'
valehtelloo...

_Tuomari_. Suu kiinni! Puhukaa sitten kun kysytään. (Pakariselle.) Te
syytätte siis Mäkäräistä lampaan vuonnan varastamisesta?

_Pakarinen_. Niin, niin, aivan niin, vuonnan varastamisesta. Se
ruojahan sen vei.

_Mäkäräinen_. Ja nyt sinä elä valehtele! Minä en ou sun lammastas'
varastanna, en, vaikka...

_Tuomari_ (Kiivastuneena.) Jos Mäkäräinen ei ole hiljaa, annan minä
sakkoa! (Pakariselle.) Oletteko te varma siitä, että se oli Mikko
Mäkäräinen, joka tuli vastaanne tiellä?

_Pakarinen_. Kyllä se ei ollut kukkaa muu ristitty kuin justiisa tuo
Mikko (Osoittaa sormellaan Mäkäräistä); tunsinhan minä sen jo käynnin
tyylistäi, vaikka ollii pimmee...

_Tuomari_. Näittekö myöskin, että hänellä oli vuona säkissä?

_Pakarinen_. Enhän minä miten vuonnoo säkin sissään nähny, mutt minä
kuulin kun se siellä miäki.

_Tuomari_. Voitteko te millään todistaa, että se oli juuri teidän
vuonanne.

_Pakarinen_. No jo tok': se miäki ihan samallalailla kuin meijän vuonna
silloin, kun akka ei jouvuta sille ruokoo oikeella aikoo.

_Tuomari_. Eikö ole pätevämpiä todistuksia?

_Pakarinen_. On siellä tuolla porstuvassa Alaspihan piika Heta
Heikkinen ja Monninmäin renkipoika Kalle Holopainen; kyllä ne nekkii
toistaa...

_Tuomari_. Jaha, jaha. (Mäkäräiselle.) Nyt on Mäkäräisen vuoro puhua.
Mitä sanotte puolustukseksenne?

_Mäkäräinen_. Minä sanon, että en ou varastanna sitä vuonnoo.

_Pakarinen_ (Ääneen itsekseen.) Kato tuota kun laski emävalleen
kaulastaan!

_Tuomari_. No, mistä sitten kuletitte sitä vuonaa, jonka kanssa tulitte
Pakarista vastaan tiellä?

_Mäkäräinen_. Sieltähän minä sitä toin kylältä... tuolta... niin...
mutt' en minä sitä varastanna.

_Tuomari_ (Tuskastuneena.) No, eikö tästä asiasta ala tulla selvää!?
Konstaapeli, kutsukaa todistajat Heta Heikkinen ja Kalle Holopainen
sisälle. (Konstaapeli kutsuu.)

    (Heta ja Kalle tulevat.)

_Tuomari_ (Kysyy asianomaisilta.) Onko mitään esteitä todistajia
vastaan?

_Pakarinen_. Ei pitäisi olla.

_Mikko Mäkäräinen_. Ei ole esteitä, ei.

_Tuomari_ (Kysyy lautamiehiltä.) Ovatkos nämä todistajat hyvämaineisia?

_Lautamiehet_. Kyllä ne ovat hyvämaineisia.

_Tuomari_ (Aukaisee pöydännurkalla olevan raamatun.) No, käykää sitten
valalle.

_Mikko Mäkäräinen_. Herra korkea oikeus! En minä vuoji valloo
tehtäväks', uskoohan sen muutennii, jos hyö niät mitä voisivat mukamas'
toistaa.

_Tuomari_. Vaatiikos päällekantaja valaa?

_Pekka Pakarinen_. Kyllähän se suattais' olla hyvä, jos tekis' valan...
-- mutt' samahan se on, olokoon minunkii puoleltan semmosennaan.
Sanokoon vuan iliman valata mitä hyö tietävät.

_Tuomari_ (Panee raamatun kiinni.) No, mitä nyt sitten Holopainen
tietää Pakarisen ja Mäkäräisen juttuun?

_Kalle Holopainen_ (Tyhmän näköisenä.) Minä tahon kulujan kolome
markkoo, kun tänne on pitkänlainen matkakii...

_Tuomari_. Mitä puhetta se on? -- Mitä tiedätte todistaa tähän juttuun?
Siitä on nyt kysymys.

_Holopainen_. Ahaa! -- Tiijähhän minä tähän paljonnii, mutt' sitä minä
vuan, että se meijän talon isäntä, joka on aikonaan ollut kova
riitamies, neuvoi minua ensikertalaista kottoo lähtiissä, jotta
"muistahan tahtoja kulujas' jalakavaivoistas'; ne ei maksa tahtomatta."

_Tuomari_. Tekin jaarittelette puuta heinää. Vastatkaa: näittekö Mikko
Mäkäräisen varastavan Pekka Pakarisen lampaanvuonan?

_Holopainen_. En minä ou nähny ihan varastavan, vuan kyllä näin kun
Mäkäräinen tul' minuvai vastaan säkki selässä, josta kuului miäkiminen.

_Tuomari_. Missä ja milloin se tapahtui?

_Holopainen_. Se tapahtui sinä pyhäiltana, kun Jännejoilla olj'
iltamat, jonne myökii oltiin mänössä.

_Tuomari_. Kenen kanssa olitte menossa? Näkikö toverinnekin sen?

_Holopainen_. En tiljä liekkö tua Heta (viittaa häneen) säkin läpi
ihteensä vuonnoo nähnyt, vuan kyllä kait sekin on sen miäkimisen
kuullut.

_Heta Heikkinen_. Näinhän minä, kun se potki säkissä ja miäkimisen
kuulin kanssa.

_Tuomari_. Jaa, te olitte siis Holopaisen mukana. Ehkä voitte myös
todistaa, että se mies, joka tuli teitä vastaan tiellä, oli Mäkäräinen?

_Heta Heikkinen_. Kyllä se tais' varmaan olla, -- herra korkee oikeus,
tunsinhan minä sen iänestäkii.

_Tuomari_. Äänestäkö? Hän sanoi, siis jotain?

_Heta Heikkinen_. Sanoi se "hyvän illan", ei muuta.

_Holopainen_. Niin, ja minä kysyin vielä, että "mistees" sitä pätiä
hilataan, vuan siihen se ei ennee virkkanna mittää, män' vuan mänöjään.

_Tuomari_. Jaha, jaha, hyvä on. Astukaa molemmat odotushuoneeseen.

_Heta Heikkinen_. Herra korkee oikeus! Minäkii tahtosin
vierasmiespalakkani.

_Tuomari_. Juu, juu. Sihteeri, merkitkää maksettavaksi...

    (Heta ja Kalle poistuvat.)

_Tuomari_. Konstaapeli, kutsukaapas päällekantajan vaimo Riikka
Pakarinen kuulusteltavaksi.

_Konstaapeli_ (Ovelta.) Riikka Pakarinen! Sisään.

_Riikka Pakarinen_ (Tulee ja niiaa.) Hyvee päivee. (Vilkuu hätäisesti
ympärilleen.)

_Tuomari_. Päivää. Oletteko te Pekka Pakarisen vaimo?

_Riikka_. Se onnetonhan minä olen.

_Tuomari_. Jaha. -- Kuten tiedätte, syyttää miehenne Mäkäräistä
lampaanvuonan varkaudesta, mutta tämä puolestaan kieltää syyllisyytensä
tähän rikokseen. Tietäisittekö te mitään asiata valaisevaa?

_Riikka_. Tiijän minä; tuo Mikkohan sen vuonnan vei.

_Tuomari_. Mistä te sen tiedätte? Todistakaa!

_Riikka_. Siitä kun se Mikko otti sen sieltä karsinasta navetasta.

_Tuomari_. Ei se ole mikään todistus. Vai näittekö hänen ottavan?

_Riikka_. Hyvä ihme... näinhän minä hyvinnii... -- (itsekseen.)... ai,
nyt taisin erehtyä sanomaan...

_Tuomari_. Jaha, te näitte siis syytetyn varastavan vuonan. Mutta miksi
sitten miehellenne olitte sanonut, ettette tiedä, minne se oli
kadonnut? Kuinka tämä on käsitettävä?

_Riikka_ (Hätäytyneenä itsekseen.) Voi minua kurjoo... Eikös tuo ukon
kutale, pakanakka ou niät huostanna tiällä kaikki ja nyt tulloo ilimi
kaikki koko heilameina; voi, voi!

_Tuomari_. Mitä te sanotte? Puhukaa kovempaa.

_Riikka_ (Itkien.) Voi, hyvä herrastuomar', minähän sen vuonnan Mikolle
annonnii. Ei se ou sitä varkain ottanna, ui, ui...

_Tuomari_ (Hämmästyen.) Mitä ihmettä! Tekö annoitte vuonan
Mäkäräiselle? No, jopa nyt jotakin! Ja minkätähden!

_Riikka_ (Itkeä tihertäen.) ... ku... kun... se antoi -- kahvin
ryöniä... ja kilon sokuria siitä eistä...!

_Tuomari_ (Ankarasti.) Jaahah, vai niin. Te siis miehenne tietämättä
tuhlaatte pesän yhteistä omaisuutta!

_Riikka_ (Yhä itkien.) Voi, voi, linnaanko minut viijään, voi herra
ihme...?!

_Tuomari_ (Mäkäräiselle.) Onko asia niin kuin tämä vaimo sanoi?

_Mäkäräinen_. Kyllä se on niin, herra korkee oikeus. Kyllä se anto
minulle sen vuonnan, että minä siitä eistä toisin hänelle kauppiaasta
2 killoo kahvia ja muutaman kilon sokuria, kun tämä olj' semmoisessa
kahvintuskassa, ettei ois' pysynnä pärevasussakkaa, jos minä en ois'
sitä siitä kiipelistä pelastanna. Hän sanoi niät mulle, että kun Pekka
männöö ens' lauvantaina kaupuntiin potatin myöntiin, niin osta sinä
sill'aikoo kahvia ja vähä sokerijakii ja tuo ne mulle, niin minä annan
sulle siitä hyvästä pienen lampaanvuonnan ja sanon ukolle sen karanneen
tahi että se on varastettu. Se ukko, ruoja, kun ei osta tarpeeks' asti
kahvia, eikä anna minullekkaan rahhoo, että saisin ostoo itekään ja
että saisin kuhtuva ies jonkun kerran nuapurmökkijen eukkoja meillennii
sananharjotuksiin ja Siijoonin virsiä veisoomaan. Niin sanoi.

_Tuomari_ (Riikalle.) Onko tämä totta?

_Riikka_. Tottapa tuo lienöön, totta. (Itkeä tihertää.)

_Tuomari_ (Pekka Pakariselle.) Kuten kuulitte, tunnusti vaimonne
antaneensa vapaaehtoisesti vuonan Mäkäräiselle, joten siis haasteenne
varkaudesta häntä vastaan on aiheeton.

_Mäkäräinen_. Niin, ja minä vuajin Pakariselle eisvastuuta viärästä
ilimiannosta.

_Tuomari_. Mitä joutavia, ei maksa vaivaa ruveta edelleen riitelemään.

_Pakarinen_ (Vimmastuneena Riikalle.) Kuuleppas, si semmostako
peukalopeliä sinä pelloottii välttää, häh kyllä minä sulle näytän, juu
senkin... (Repii Riikkaa tukasta.)

_Tuomari_. So, so, so, vähemmällä, hiljaa, hiljaa!

_Lautamiehet_. Hiljaa, hiljaa!

_Konstaapeli_. (Hyökkää rauhoittamaan Pakarista.) Tyst', ei oikeudessa
saa tapella, pois kynnet tukasta!

_Riikka_ (Itkien ääneen.) Voi, voi, vielä sinä peto tulet repimään, kun
et ensin anna kahvirahhoo... voi, voi...

_Tuomari_. Hiljaa! Nyt otetaan lyhyt loma päätöksen harkitsemista
varten. Asialliset poistukoot siksi aikaa istuntohuoneesta.

    (Riikka, Pekka ja Mikko poistuvat, jonka jälkeen tuomari
    heittäytyy selkäkenoon tuolillaan haukotellen ja venytellen.)

_Tuomari_. No, mitäs lautakunta arvelee tästä "sopasta"?

    (Lautamiehet naureskelevat ja väliin venyttelevät.)

_1:n lautamies_. Soma juttu. Kyllä se on tuo kahvi herkkua akkain
mielestä.

_2:n lautamies_. Soma juttu, kerrassaan soma... Mitä tuon kanssa olisi
tehtävä?

_3:s lautamies_. Kaikenlaisista asioista sitä lähdetäänkin riitasille.
Parasta kun kuitataan tuollainen juttu "vellin kanssa vastakkain".

_4:s lautamies_. Sitä minäkin.

_5:s lautamies_. Samoin minä. Saakoot "nahkan".

_1:n lautamies_. Kyllä passaa!

_2:n lautamies_. Hyvin kyllä minunkin puolestani.

_Tuomari_. Niin, kumotaan vaan kanne ja kulut kuitataan asianomaisten
kesken.

    (Kirjuri alkaa kirjoittaa päätöstä supatellen tuomarin kanssa.)

_1:n lautamies_. Ahaa, mutta eikös se Mäkäräinen vaatinut eisvastuuta
Pakariselle väärästä ilmiannosta ja kunnianloukkauksesta?

_Tuomari_. Mainitsihan se siitä, mutta minun mielestäni olisi
Pakarisellakin ihan yhtä hyvä syy vaatia sitä samaa. Sen tähden on
parasta kun annetaan "nahka" tällaisesta roskajutusta.

_2:n lautamies_. Kyllä se on parasta.

_3:s lautamies_. Ja saahan se Pakarinen tarpeeksi "oppirahoja" maksaa,
kun sen suoritettavaksi tulevat vierastenmiesten palkkiot ja
protokollarahat.

_4:s lautamies_. Siinä on tarpeeksi "sakkoa".

_5:s lautamies_. On kyllä köyhälle miehelle.

_Tuomari_. No, niin, nyt on päätös valmis. (Ottaa paperin kirjurin
edestä.) Konstaapeli, kutsukaa asianomaiset päätöstä kuulemaan.

_Konstaapeli_ (Huutaa ovelta eteiseen.) Hei, tulkaapa nyt tuomiolle!

    (Pekka, Mikko, Riikka, Heta ja Kalle tulevat.)

_Kalle Holopainen_ (Ilvehtien tullessaan viimeisenä Hetan selän takana,
nykien tätä letistä.) Hei Hakkaraisen pojat juomaan pulituuria!

_Heta_. Eläs, eläs.

_Konstaapeli_.  Siivolla, siivolla.

_Tuomari_ (Lukee virallisella äänellä.) "Kihlakunnan oikeus on ottanut
tämän asian harkittavakseen, mutta koska päällekantaja ei ole voinut
kannettansa todistaa, niin kanne kumotaan ja asianlaatuun katsoen
kuitataan kulungit asianomaisten kesken, minkä ohella kantaja
velvoitetaan suorittamaan molemmille todistajille palkkiota 3 markkaa
sekä tämän pöytäkirjan lyhennysotteen lunastuksesta ja muista
kulungeista aiheutuneet menot." -- Saatte astua ulos.

    (Tuomari kokoilee papereitaan pöydältä, lautamiehet
    naurahtelevat ja kuiskailevat keskenään.)

_Riikka_ (Pakariselle.) Semmoista se on, kun et antanna tarpeeks' asti
rahhoo kahviin, onko nyt parempi pulittoo kukkarostas kymmeniä markkoja
oikeuskuluja. Kyllä minä sulta monta kertoo ruikutin, mutt' et ollut
kuulevinaskaan sitä puhetta... (Itkuun pillahtaen.) Voi, voi, Pekka,
nuin se nyt käv', -- se on kaikki sinun syytäs, mokoma tupakkaturpa!...

_Pekka_ (Hyökkää Riikan kimppuun.) Tukitko turpas', akka, vai annanko
sulle vasten höskyäs'... vielä sinä siinä...

    (Pieksää Riikkaa; konstaapeli ja lautamiehet rientävät asettamaan.)

_Tuomari_ (Lyöden nyrkkiä pöytään.) Jos ette ole siivolla niin minä
sakotan teitä! Menkää ulos tappelemaan.

_Konstaapeli_. Hiljaa, hiljaa! Pääsettekö pellolle riitelemään.

    (Väki alkaa poistua tuvasta.)

_Mikko Mäkäräinen_ (Kiellosta välittämättä kiihtyneenä ulos mennessään
puiden nyrkkiään aivan Pakarisen nenän edessä.) Ja sinä, kanalja, sinä
herjasit minua rosvoks', vaikka oma akkas' varastikkii ja sitten syytät
siitä kunnijallisia immeisiä. Kyllä minä sulle näytän...

    (Hyökkää käsiksi.)

_Pekka Pakarinen_ (Vastustellen.) Eläpäs piälle tule, ou vaikka kuinnii
kunniallinen! (Puuhkaa Mikon erilleen itsestään.) Pysy erilläs' piru
ristitystä!

    (Joukko -- muut paitsi tuomari, sihteeri, lautamiehet ja
    konstaapeli -- poistuvat verkalleen tuvasta.)

_1:n lautamies_ (Toisille, väen poistuttua.) Olipa se sakia! -- Kaikkea
se "kahvikulta" aikaansaa!

    (Kaikki nauravat.)

-- Väliverho. --



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KAHVIKULTA***


******* This file should be named 63471-8.txt or 63471-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/3/4/7/63471


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

